请点击右上角的Raw进行阅读

Frisians and their North Sea Neighbours: From the Fifth Century to the Viking Age
Edited by John Hines and Nelleke Ijssennagger. Boydell. 2017.

This collection of twelve essays is based upon the proceedings of an international symposium entitled ‘Across the North Sea: North Sea Connections from AD 400 into the Viking Age’ held at the Fries Museum, Leeuwarden, in June 2014. Designed to provide a sustained focus on the cultural interactions between the Frisian peoples and their neighbours, particularly the Anglo-Saxons,over the fifth to the eighth centuries AD, the contributions are grouped by chronological/geographical focus rather than by discipline in order to ‘break free of over-specialized and constrained perspectives’ (p. xiii). Illuminating the Frisian scene from both inside-out versus outside-in perspectives, the content is dominated by archaeological and, to a lesser extent, palaeogeographical studies(seven essays), although historical linguistics/runology is also well represented(four essays) and several of the contributions range across archaeology, history and historical linguistics.

A number of cross-cutting themes emerge from reading this varied and stimulating set of essays. First is a clear sense of how the cultural trajectory of the Frisian peoples and their interactions with the wider world was structured by regional diversity (an impression unwittingly intensified by the confusing array of geographical terminology reproduced in the volume). The Frisia which emerges from this volume approximates more to an interconnected nexus of ‘small worlds’ than a homogeneous cultural province, one in which the particularities of the physical environment exerted a powerful influence over cultural expression and identity. One of the principal leitmotifs of the book is the significance of rivers in shaping cultural trajectories, both as barriers to and conduits of connectivity: several of the essays identify the river Vlie as a major cultural fault-line over the fifth to seventh centuries AD, the lands to its north displaying markedly different burial customs and architectural traditions than those to its south; conversely,from a linguistic point of view, the Rhine andWeser corridors served as important axes of interaction between Old Frisian and Old Saxon speech communities.

A related aspect of this regionally variegated picture, one particularly brought to the fore by the archaeological contributions within the volume, is the recognition of enduring ‘hot-spots’ of wealth and activity within the Frisian landscape. Two localities which particularly stand out in this regard are the coastal peninsula of Westergo, north Friesland, and the area of Sievern situated within the Elbe–Weser triangle on the eastern fringes of Frisian territory.Both of these micro-regions are distinguished by significant concentrations of hoarded wealth (most conspicuously Scandinavian-style gold bracteates) combined with other ‘central-place’ activities and features consistent with the view that they served as important centres of political power and kingship in the centuries leading up to the formation of a unified Frisian kingdom in the eighth century.

Drawing upon deep-time perspectives, several of the essays place a spotlight on the changing dynamics of Frisia’s interactions with the outside world; these combine to demonstrate that such interactions were persistently renegotiated subject to socio-political developments both at home and abroad. Nicolay’s essay offers a particularly compelling narrative of this theme conjured from spatio-temporal patterns in the consumption of prestigious jewellery (principally brooches and bracteates) used as markers of elite identity. He argues that styles of jewellery consumed by the Frisian elite were constantly readjusted to express affiliations with external sources of power and authority – successively Roman,Scandinavian, Frankish and Byzantine – each realignment marking a distinct stage in the process of political centralization that culminated in the formation of a unified Frisian state. This account is very nicely counterbalanced by Pestell’s essay offering an external, East Anglian, perspective on Anglo-Frisian relations.His strong command of the archaeological data from the region, in particular the rich collections of metalwork recorded by the PortableAntiquities Scheme, allows him to chart changes in the character and intensity of maritime contacts between the two regions, both in terms of a direct rapprochement and with Frisians as intermediaries in Anglo-Frankish trade.

Overall, there is much to recommend in this rich collection of essays. By shedding new critical light on the problems and complexities associated with ‘Anglo-Frisian’ identity and its place within the wider maritime North Sea world,it will certainly fulfil its stated aspiration to stimulate a new generation of research and thinking.

University of Reading 
GABOR THOMAS
